serious voice - here is my girlfriend
Melissa sitting just off camera eyes old
something that surprised me about you
when we first got together was the fact
that you were interested in economics
and think I think stereotypically people
who are interested in languages and
religion may not be the most
economically oriented people the people
who care about money or finance and you
know this type of and let me just say
one of the social context in which this
emerges and becomes obvious is for
example that her dad can't push me
around about economics right and my own
father when he was alive could not push
me around about economics I think many
people your family dynamic whether
you're talking about politics or your
own personal life actually the younger
generation being pushed around by the
older generation because of the
assumption that the older generation
knows more about economics I think it's
actually a common theme I think it's a
common family dynamic but yeah that was
that was probably one of the most
striking situations in which you noticed
it but it's true also just living in an
apartment of me and walking around
there's a lot of commentary about yeah
as we walked around different places in
the world one of your comments the USA
is invest now you know places that look
really rundown you know just as a joke
you say that but you know it's not so
much a joke because often we should see
her where we were living we were first
together
I was really commenting a lot and how
the economy was changing there they were
building a new railroad that was there
were things fundamentally changed with
the economy and I was often saying look
invest now because we know what's gonna
happen here that is true it's actually
when we were first together it wasn't a
joke maybe some other time like when we
were in Detroit that's true I just want
to say maybe it's not so much a joke
because so much of your life has been
about places that are basically economic
disasters yes you know you were you
spent a lot of time in Laos and Cambodia
places that are notoriously impoverished
and you know you actually chose to live
in poverty you know
you had that you had many options I
think when you were first starting
University what you wanted to study
certainly moving to Cambodia was not the
most obvious option at the end of
options other than that yeah I mean this
is an anecdote of yours but I wanted to
share it because I found it interesting
and it relates to this topic you after
you graduated from university you used
to do lectures at high schools yes so
just to be clear this wasn't a very long
period in my life but in Canada there
was a special program to make sure that
other religious groups were represented
within the Catholic schools and
Christian schools so they would pay
someone who was a Buddhist to give
lectures on history of Buddhism they
would I think they'd all say in do they
pay some number of people like that to
come in and give some kind of
representative lecture at that time I
already had the credentials to go and
represent Buddhism so yeah that I forget
moves maybe six lectures like with
something like that wasn't a huge number
right it wasn't some vast lecture - yeah
it was an interesting experience right
when I was at the end of my my BA the
University of Toronto yeah yeah so
definitely I think a valuable experience
for somebody that's just graduating from
University and they paid in cash
beginning I was he that the Canadian
school board system did pay me for those
lectures unlike unlike the lectures that
give them on YouTube but hey yeah so the
anecdote you shared with me the other
day was that a student in your class she
heard that you had been to Italy oh yes
sure she just asked just demanded yeah
maybe she thought I looked Italian is I
don't know why she was Italian
yeah but I would go on and she was
really surprised that you were planning
to go live right I was crying the
venetie Cambodia etc at that time
already right yeah she said you've been
to Italy don't you want to live in a
DeLorean
you know like thinking that it's
paradise right but you instead chose to
live in a place that is I mean I'm not
saying yes he is the best in terms of
economics but it's better but I had I
had a question from a student in the
audience and she
did regarded to Lea's paradise and the
question was why wouldn't you want to go
live a month with olive oil in Italy or
something yeah so I just think this is
an interesting aspect of your character
that you've chosen to live in
impoverished and also that when you
began studying at University your
intention was to study economics but not
for the typical reason that people would
study economics so that that's the way
in which it makes sense is you can say
that what I did at the end of University
was actually very similar to my
aspirations at the beginning so when I
enrolled in economics what I was
interested in was the philosophy of
poverty and I was interested in doing
work linked to post-war reconstruction
the emergence out of poverty and kind of
post-war and devastated conditions and
one of the examples I was interested in
was South Korea now I would not have
said this in these terms at the time but
it's interesting I've heard many people
say this after visiting South Korea
including the YouTuber an Sen it was
actually a big turning point his life
when he moved to South Korea and I
forget there was another youtuber
recently I heard it was an American oh
yeah yeah was a left-wing extremist
who's left-wing anarchist extremist and
he said that for him this turning point
was going to South Korea and realizing
he had been raised with the doctrine
that America was the greatest country in
the world and he got to South Korea to
decide it's not true so South Korea for
me was an example of a country that had
very recently and very rapidly emerged
from poverty and it created a society
that was at least as good as Canada
probably better in every way that
matters including most obvious to me the
level of education I found to be higher
than Canada the things I cared about
seem to be better in South Korea than in
Canada and I was interested in the
mystery of why can South Korea do that
and not Cambodia or not yet
Cambodia hasn't done it yet you know
Cambodia has not bounced back yet and
indeed also the why South Korea and not
Canada why South Korea not Detroit why
South Korea not Ireland
you know today Ireland is actually quite
affluent but at that time Ireland was
you know and it's still in a
reconstruction phase itself and so on so
that questions to the philosophy of
poverty and I mean you know if you if
you want to make a difference in the
world do you want to make a difference
catering to the rich and wealthy and
working at the top or do you want to
make a difference at the bottom just
pragmatically it seems almost inevitable
the people will focus it at the bottom
one way or another if you're sincere
about making a difference in the world I
mean there are exceptions I've said this
in the channel before if you want to do
something like environmental science
it's kind of inevitably elitist it
involves catering to elites and
expensive research and expensive
lobbying for government policy and so on
but I felt most of the things I cared
about you know they had to do with the
poor in poverty and in these questions
so yeah in that sense what I did at the
end of university was I should put
someone who I did the beginning but at
the beginning I enrolled in economics
looking for the philosophy of poverty
and instead what I found were you know I
said at the time I mean I remember I
said this to my parents and I said this
to kind of anyone who would listen I
said only now that I've been in the
department of economics do I understand
you know who buys roof and all so roof
and all was an illegal drug used at that
time for to date for date rape to drug
women and take advantage them I was like
you know I could never imagine who it
was that would do this before but I
found myself in the classroom with
people I considered utterly despicable
nobody else was there for the philosophy
of poverty people were there to get rich
quick to get an imaginary job as a
stockbroker
you know financier investment advisor
probably their idea of that was based on
watching movies from the 1980s the firm
which glamorized the life of a
stockbroker it's you know not they're
gonna get nobody else was in the
classroom with those intentions and the
intentions of the professors are also
pretty awful the quality of English
spoken was abominably low I was often in
classes
where you know at least 30% of the
students spoke Chinese is the first
language and the teaching assistant
could really couldn't speak English
there were new immigrant from China or
Korea themselves there were a lot of
things obviously wrong with it and also
what was presumed was that everyone was
already beginning this course at a very
high level of mathematical ability I had
not gained in high school or from my
parents or what-have-you
they weren't going to teach you math
they were just going to punish you for
not already knowing university level
economics math the the equation side of
it so it was a really bad situation of
family so thing but above all else it
just philosophically morally ethically
the the purpose of Education they were
giving you I had nothing to do with my
reasons for studying economics and I
should clarify this does not have to do
with the difference between macro and
micro economics it doesn't I'm genuinely
interested in micro economics also and
that distinction really comes from John
Maynard Keynes and the Keynes in view of
economics it's like everything else it's
kind of an unreal and self-serving
distinction but you know microeconomics
meaning how particular businesses work
or particular segments the economy so to
give an example why is it that almost no
clothing is made in America anymore
that's that's a micro economic problem
right you know why is it that Americans
almost all the clothes they wear are
imported from China or Bangladesh or
India or even Europe but remarkably
little of American the mercury a small
percentage of American clothing is made
in factories in there remarkably small
percentage of textiles wouldn't even get
into that so maybe maybe just one stage
of the process now that that's all very
interesting me too but my approach is
it's fundamentally humanitarian and
outlook like I'm interested in that for
humanitarian reasons I'm interested me
in the world a better place and
obviously if you in a room full of
people who are I mean at that time it
was day trading in tech stocks and stuff
was crap like that stupid get-rich-quick
schemes and how to flip houses on the
real estate market or some you know if
these are the dominant passions if this
is the purpose of Education and so on er
this is what the the credential is full
and then I guess the other great
fascination was the extent to which
computers could now analyze the behavior
of the stock market and people can
convince themselves it's like gambling
you know people can convince themselves
they've figured out the system you know
the the secret relationship between the
numbers when there's a computer doing
analysis of the stock market not
admitted ASIS is important so yeah it
was you know I was in the wrong place
for all the right reasons I found myself
in economics in a department economics
where my motivations had nothing to do
with the teachers or the students there
however economics as a science as a
social science mean I mean that I'm not
there's no sarcasm my part when I talk
about economics is so it is it is a
science and also economics is a
philosophy and economics as a kind of
theater of political critique that was a
tremendously meaningful part of my life
before I start University like already
at high school and it remained a
tremendously important part of my life
during University and after I never gave
up on it and it never gave up on me so
you can imagine if you just have a you
know kind of sophisticated education and
economics you really do understand the
basics for one thing you're immune to
many of the fads of left-wing andy ology
that have coming on i'm also immune to
the fads of right-wing ideology you may
not have noticed in a channel you know
ridiculous ideas about libertarianism
and stuff and find laughable so you know
it helps you in that way negatively but
this this of course also made me very
different from the average person who
majors in buddhism you know the average
person who meditates in the size of the
study that dharma you know the way in
which i understood I mean again just as
just in simple terms what had happened
in Vietnam Cambodia and Laos after World
War two or something any but any example
how I understood what happened in India
under the British Empire the sense of
economic realism and being able to do
economic analysis for any in every
period of history and scrutinized things
that way that made me really different
from the people around me and he
these theaters of research or academic
endeavor made me different the other
people in Asian Studies at UVic another
interesting contrast this is jumping at
many many years back when I was married
to an anthropologist I was with her
Arno's with other people in departments
of cultural anthropology and I was at a
much higher level of economic literacy
in economic analysis than they were so
again their their discipline was
anthropology but as you can imagine very
often what they wanted to deal with were
economic abstractions and
generalizations and so on so yeah it's I
mean again I just read a book in front
of you just literally today I read a new
textbook that came out in economics I'm
still really interested in economics
well even the book reviews I did on
Bernie Sanders or something it shows me
cross-examining what's going on in terms
of current economic theory and
philosophy and the way in which that's
packaged into economic critique critique
of what's going on politically and
proposals for new policy packages try to
make the world a better place I never
lost my interest in that and it's simply
it's remained a tremendously meaningful
and rewarding part of my life and let's
be all the way well let's be all the way
real about us be honest about it that's
not sure of Buddhism Buddhism didn't
remain meaningful in my life that way
you could say that about other specific
velocities I don't feel the philosophy
of Arthur Schopenhauer was tremendously
meaningful in my life long-term
interesting at a certain time in my life
for certain reasons and then you move on
and that's it
but I mean I've read innumerable books
of philosophy and I've studied many
chapters of history that really just
have a kind of very limited significance
or meaning in my life and you know you
build up some sophistication by studying
one period of history after another one
culture after another so on and so forth
but nevertheless yeah economics you know
it could be called kind of the queen of
the sciences this way because it's it's
the science the kind of rules over all
the other sciences and pervades the
discussion of all the other sciences I
mean even but to give an example that
comes up here we often discuss things in
nutritional science or even in
psychology where you have to come to
the answer to this question isn't
unknowable it's just unknown because the
research would cost millions of dollars
and wouldn't wouldn't be rewarding and
so on so in that sense also economics
shapes the other research that gets done
and doesn't get done it shapes what
messages get promoted whether through
advertising or by the government and
propaganda and which don't that sense of
you know economic expediency shaping the
world around it over the world around us
it shapes the way history is written it
shapes what gets remembered and what
gets forgotten and so and so forth so
the profit motive tugging a human nature
and every which way yeah it's it's been
one of the most meaningful parts my life
and I it's also interesting mean I think
the first thing I said I think you can
appreciate that too I think that the
study of economics allows us to stand up
to our own parents I was true within my
own unique family your family is totally
different but I think it I think it
matters very often as young adults or
whatever we have to stand up and justify
why some venture and other is worth the
money or the decisions we have to make
or whatever I mean being able to give a
robust you know explanation of what
you're doing and why in terms of
economics again both microeconomics and
macroeconomics I think is it's it's
important in our own lives in that way -
yeah I love that response I credit you
with my my introduction to economics
really I never took an economics class
in university and of course I think it
is a flaw in the American education
system that you are not that students
are not required to take even like a
personal finance course but in reality
economics governs everything in our
lives and it's both visible and
invisible every day whether you know
it's your choice to just you know to be
able to see the economics and everything
or how everything is is you know right
yeah it's all intertwined well I mean
you know with money what is the yeah
why did Napoleon invaded right now you
know of course racism is an ass
religion is an aspect but a little bit
more paradoxical than you might at first
think if you look into that Napoleon
actually openly promised to convert to
Islam he was going to become Muslim so
he could be the Emperor of Egypt that
was pre-planned he changed his name to
Napoleon Ali not making this up you know
you could use words like Orientalism the
idea of going there and doing
archaeology and turning up mysteries in
the past which they did I mean that
wasn't that wasn't a complete illusion
but yes very fundamentally you have to
understand in terms of economics what
was the idea that the French Empire
would become wealthier and also that
they would make the British Empire a
poor there's this competition between
empires that was what you know that was
what drove it you know so many many of
these things there there's a fundamental
economic rationale even if it's
completely false even was a ridiculous
delusion that's me understand that has
to be understood to flip forward a
hundred years or more yeah I guess with
more than hundred years why did France
try to conquer and colonize Cambodia
ridiculous notion but of course I mean
you know kind of by whether you deal
with it first or last the answer is
gonna be the ineluctable answer is going
to be economics even if even if you want
to talk about other ideological
categories like racism and so on they
matter to some extent too but it's gonna
begin and end I think with economics
yeah the queen of the sciences yeah I
guess I could say just to talk a little
bit on that point it's true we grew up
you know I'm completely different
opposite spectrums you know your parents
have a very far left ideology her father
is basically a stereotypical Donald
Trump supporter yeah yeah right wing I
worked hard for my money you know right
and he was always you know for me I felt
like he was like then I'm sorry
you know I don't want to speak badly it
was like kind of like the mr. krabs
stereotype of like you know things those
about money you know this is a reference
to the cartoon spongebob like life is
about money legs
money and be an adult means earning
money and supporting yourself supporting
a family right and of course like part
of me wanted to fight back against and I
just never cared you know I just didn't
feel myself motivated by money
you know I thought myself motivated but
it's something something else in my life
you know like I wanted something more
than money so that was kind of like the
introduction with with my intro
economics was basically like okay enough
to survive and you know do whatever
whatever else you you want you want to
do what if your life that's meaningful
so yeah I don't know it is it is nursing
that you grew up in this far left
setting environment well I think - so in
my culture I mean I come from Canada but
very similar to the northern United
States Alize there's an assumption that
anyone on the left will be sort of
pointedly ignorant about economics like
they're almost intentionally and
over-the-top ignorant about economics
left wingers they love to throw up their
hands and pretend that like the stock
market just doesn't make any sense like
you know interest rates just don't make
it it's just incomprehensible and and
therefore capitalism is gonna collapse
because it's just so hard to understand
that's like you know if you spent just
two weeks studying this stuff do you
really think what what do you think's
already to understand like textbook
economics or how to play the piano and
to play the piano well is that minimum
100 hours of practice I don't know come
up with your own estimate but you know I
don't know if you can get over your
sense of aversion and fear a hundred
hours would be a long time this study
you know really it's the history of
economics you learn from you know
obviously to also pick up some of the
jargon and principles and understand
when in what context that jargon was
invented and what purpose it served and
maybe now today we used the term
differently and assumptions have shifted
it's as you say it's not emits a science
you want to understand in that kind of
diachronic historical fashion a science
with shifting assumptions but this is
even true of medical science by the way
you know the meaning of the word bile
has changed
bolita the concept of the humors of the
body and so on the meaning of the
assumptions about blood pressure and
fiber in your diet we use the same terms
but they're used in a different way as
time goes on but anyone more
dramatically obviously within a thirty
year period
what what's done in economics really
changes but yeah when I was with my
blond ex-girlfriend so she's been
referred to she was my girlfriend
we really got serious in the last year
in the university when I was a normal
age University student decades ago but
you know I think she definitely had the
assumption that I was a left-wing person
who came from a left-wing family and
that I would therefore share in this
sort of self-righteous incomprehension
and anything to do with business
anything to do with the stock we're just
just pretending to be too pure to care
about business and very evil capitalism
right and scoffing well actually an
example I mean some people are left to
finally give this up but when I was a
kid this is Emma Corman just scoffing at
the idea that deficits matter the debt
matters that government responsibility
for how much that is oh oh they only
only some kind of right-wing
fundamentalist could possibly imagine
that the government going bankrupt is a
problem oh you know as if there's any
limit down which money the government
could spend so yeah I mean I think a
good comparison would be the way some
right-wing people definitely now in the
United States of America many right-wing
people just profess their total in
comprehension of ecology of
environmentalism oh oh as if as if
anyone could possibly try to quantify
how much air pollution there is or how
much pollution there is in rivers and
try to control it the whole world
suddenly they get real unscientific when
it when we're moving into a science
that's contrary to their you know their
ideological objectives so yeah there's
something similar there with
left-wingers
and yeah the surprise was so my blonde
girlfriend we were together for many
years I forget but you know gradually
she learned to really respect like whoa
your understanding of economics is kind
of like a key that unlocks a lot of kind
of practical mysteries around us yeah I
mean she lived with me in several
totally different cultural settings you
know Hong Kong bizarre economic
situation Thailand and then we moved to
Laos together yeah we also have been
tell one together extras you know and
you know each of those and kind of
making different observations and
analyses of what's going on now and how
that reflects what's happened over the
last 50 years so Melissa also is now
been with me for years and everywhere we
go there's this kind of analysis of
what's what's going right and what's
going wrong that's right yeah recently
we we met with your mother and she asked
me did I like Thailand well you know
it's a very broad question right and I
ended up saying it was an interesting
experience being in Thailand because
it's both the most impoverished place
that I've seen in the mostly in the most
wealthy economy but you know I I grew up
in the Detroit area I mean I got to see
once I got to see a real economic
disaster growing up so one what one
might think that I would have more
interest in economics you got to see
that economic theory has real-world
consequences interests yeah right yeah
you know I I really appreciate that this
aspect of your character this this
interest in economics and I think like
you're blond ex-girlfriend said then it
really does hold the key to many of the
problems in society that seem
incomprehensible or seem confusing for a
lot of people um and I think like what I
experienced before just like hating
money or like hating the fact that I
needed to earn money I think this is a
very immature childish kind of view of
things like that you know I just I wish
you know I can live on the basics basics
provided and like you know because I'm
not an extravagant person I think we
both agree on this what kind of I'm a
cheapskate you know like so yeah I just
say it moving beyond it being just
something like oh I hate money I love
money rather instead saying
money is this thing that right is the
key to well I say this there's a
difference between saying earning money
is the meaning of life and saying the
study of money right is meaningful and
exposes to you what's going on around
you in life you know if it was your
understanding of when we first got here
when we're first coming to sorry I said
here we first got the Taiwan you know
there was this incident where the
farmers were giving away cabbage for
free yeah right so in a simple sense
like this it's really meaningful to
study okay what's going on in
agriculture where you're living and how
does that shape the world around you so
when we Melissa and I live together in
Yunnan China and right away you notice
is this really strange economy linked to
agriculture they farm some crops like
coffee they form strawberries and you
know the strawberry economy for one
month of the year the town is completely
drowned in strawberries and there are
none boom and bust and you know you see
the way the mango market shifts you know
there's some times when they're
importing mangoes exporting mangoes and
yeah you know in this way as I say yeah
did the study of money the study of
where money comes from where it goes and
how the economy around you functions it
is very very meaningful but that doesn't
mean that I think earning as much money
as possible is the meaning of my life or
anyone's life really okay yeah I think
it was really interesting and I
appreciate that you recorded it after my
suggestion okay guys so I'll give the
link below the video
Melissa does have our own YouTube
channel really uploaded to now but no I
think in the Mustad I think you're gonna
see some new videos on Melissa's channel
to check it out Hema Dan